In this paper, the authors introduced Sustainable AI, which they define as a movement to foster change in the entire lifecycle of AI products. We should count every step from the generation of ideas, training, re-tuning, implementation, and governance in order to have ecological integrity and social justice. The purpose of this paper is to inspire the readers and policymakers to think about the environment when building AI applications.
They defined 3 waves of AI ethics. The first wave described what AI can do. The second wave addressed the practical concerns of explainability, increase in facial and emotion recognition systems infringing on citizens' privacy. The third wave concerns the environmental disaster. The motivation for this third wave is the huge consumption of AI models.
The paper continues with some examples of carbon usage of well-known AI models such as Google’s AlphaGo Zero, which generated 96 tonnes of CO2 over 40 days of research training—equivalent to 1000 hours of air travel or the carbon footprint of 23 American homes.
The other reason why we have to care about Sustainable AI is that the usage is not limited to some industries—it is, and will be, generally used in every single domain.

In this paper, they define Sustainable AI as 2 separate branches. On one hand, we have AI for sustainability, which they argue is more developed. This consists of building AI applications to achieve sustainability. They cite the non-profit organization AI4Good, which is... For example, AI and ML are used to achieve the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals to make affordable and clean energy.
On the other hand, we have the sustainability of AI, which is the sustainable development of AI itself—meaning how to measure the sustainability of developing and using AI models (e.g., measuring the carbon footprints, computational power for training algorithms).
They quoted: “AI for sustainability cannot be achieved without simultaneously addressing the sustainability of AI.”
